How can it be reprehensible? 
The looks on their dead faces, as they plunge 
into you, your hand circling a column

of one-time flesh and pulsing blood that now 
has long been ash and dispersed chemicals. 
The half-glimpsed mirror over their shoulders.

This one on the floor of his sitting-room 
unexpectedly, one far afternoon; 
that one whose house you broke into, climbing

through his bathroom window after a row. 
The one who called you a mermaid; the one 
who was gay, really, but you both forgot.

They have all forgotten now: forgotten 
you and their wives and the other mermaids 
who slithered in their beds and took their breath.

Disentangle your fingers from their hair. 
Let them float away, like Hylas after 
the nymphs dragged him gurgling into the pool.

Get off my back 
daughter 
this is not dancing
you have sharpened your spurs.

Get off my back
you are giving me 
the fingers 
behind my head.

Get off my back 
you have me pinned 
against the ropes 
the ref is on his tea break.

Get off my back 
I am not carrying you 
to my grave.

Get off my back 
from up there you are 
taller than me.

I will not race you 
to the finish line 
race you to freedom 
I will not count down.

I am not your competitor 
daughter 
you signed me up
without my permission.

I am not your 
leap frog.

She is sunny 
she is sunny side up, my girl 
running to meet me. 
The other girls look lumpy 
with their slumping shoulders 
dyed hair and regrowth. 
But my one is a beautiful apple 
rolling down the drive 
out past the school gates.

It is my fault 
her toenails 
her thighs 
the hideous 
hair on her arms.

My fault 
she has too many books 
it’s making her schoolbag 
fat.

Fat is my fault 
I don’t feed her 
correctly, don’t limit 
her intake.

My fault 
the failed marriage 
I am simply 
unlovable.

No money is my fault 
what sort of grown-up 
is an actress.

No brothers or sisters 
my biggest fault 
an unpardonable crime.

It’s a feast or a famine 
with sperm 
wouldn’t you say? 
Some days they can lap at your feet 
other days are shorter.

I see flakes of babies 
on hands 
on shirt fronts 
on benches 
on car back-seats

The old guy, toothless and cursing
wearing socks and jandals 
is full of babies.

The college boy 
has left babies 
on his sheets this morning.

The brothers and sisters 
how stupid of them 
to leave it up to me.

Stupid too 
the German psychologist’s 
advice.

One child will now 
bury her parents.

The brothers and sisters 
salty baby mammals 
have returned to the sea

turning into little grey whales.

Bullshit, she says 
and I better bloody not be. 
I watch her b’s bounce off 
the breakfast table, 
stinging little orange and black 
bumbles 
stick to my hair.

Mum come upstairz 
my throats 2 sore 
2 call out 2 u.

In firemother red 
I take the stairs 
two at a time.

for my son
What I knew of their house 
was a blue garage door,
kicked-in at the middle.
A buckling dent.

You approach a scene like that
with caution. It takes time
to know whether to pause
or hurry, head down.

Their glowing white saris 
on this grey marble day. 
Outside the buckled
door, a station wagon, black.

I was thinking of you. How you 
will find out. The black suit
you will wear. How the feel
of your best white shirt could hurt.

How silk might hang 
in a cold wardrobe. I pushed
you through those people. 
I pushed you along the road.

That next morning as I stepped from the shower
I caught myself in the mirror, I was shocked 
to see the marks like blackened flowers 
fallen onto snow, fluttering down the backs of my thighs
like finding something huge and succulent and moving.
I looked closer between my thighs 
and on the cheeks of my bottom 
and found the purple blooms.

And right then, the way they say people on the verge of death 
see their lives flash, I saw him behind me
I saw his hands twisted in black fistfuls, my scalp scorched
my throat curved up like an invitation glistening
to a blade and my mouth open wide 
like the death cries of small gods.
I saw him grind me into the bed, the wall
because there was no space no space 
between us, he was pushed so far 
inside me the room had to give.
I saw his hands on my hips smash me into him 
I saw his fingers dig into the flesh
of my ass-cheeks like you would dig 
your way through wet sand 
if you knew something was buried there—
treasure or a living child.

All I wanted was for him to break
me, split me in half 
and then in half again
again and again
until my body was smashed out of existence
like the cliff that becomes
the sand that swims 
inside the sea.

Wake in the dark to the sound of a log 
dropping to the ground in a distant timber yard 
a train uncoupling in the village 
the growl of something old 
angry and tethered.

No. It’s just your wife’s gentle snore. 
Don’t allow the year to scare 
the substance out of you – a woeful 
fight between a toddler and a swarm of bees. 
A predetermined sonata, but screamed.

Hide your Christmas funds in the empty 
World War Two artillery shell. 
When it matters most 
have someone bend over your bed 
to adjust the pillows, lifting and opening.

When she says Please don’t leave me 
Say No, it is you who is leaving me. 
Choose the avocado and the yellow ballpoint 
with the testament This pen was stolen 
from Finn McCool’s Irish Pub

For your final meal demand 
beer and jaffa custard plus those twig-thin 
chocolate spirals at two dollars ninety-five a dozen. 
A fine writing implement melting between your fingers.

When someone says a pole without a flag 
respond a woman in her pyjamas kneeling 
on concrete. Post something 
to PO Box 47 Taneatua 
then wait for the small, brown flowers

to burst open. Listen to the 
newspaper-reading in the next room 
the crack of the page under your writing hand 
something metal, unoiled 
turning in the wind.

I cared for my children like a flying fox 
kept them safe under my wings 
when they were small and hesitant

tipped paracetamol and antibiotics 
down persistently inflamed throats 
during endless nights of earache

gassed them with ventolin cocktails 
when asthma stole their breath

had broken bones reset and a tongue bitten off 
from a faulty landing on a trampoline 
reattached in a theatre without movies

then regretted it 
when that fiapoko mouth 
started up again

we've laughed at dinosaurs and cartoons 
at nana crooning Buffalo Soldier 
at pa's jokes and the bills that kept arriving 
for the ever-declining cashflow card

there were the retreads that outlived cars 
and the unexpected appearance of food 
in our sprayed and wiped-out cupboards

there's so much to think about 
as I sit barefoot in church 
behind the vividly turbaned mamas 
paying their respects to Éloi Machoro

a South Pacific Che Guevara 
a dead son of this island

that siege 
and the photo of Machoro 
smashing a ballot box with an axe

immortalised him beyond the bullets 
that felled a man into a crimson pool

my sons are still learning the difference 
between people's needs and wants 
and how to match actions with words

but I remember

they wore their Che Guevara t-shirts 
until they fell off their backs 
David Beach  
Parachute

She would never have jumped alone and seeing
the world like an immense crevice she might
have abandoned the tandem jump if the
instructor hadn’t had Greek god genes. He
smiled at her reassuringly, she nodded
and they were off, her fear turned to delight
with the motorcycle which gravity
had given them. She approved his delay
in pulling the cord. Then she realised he
was pulling the cord. She’d picked Icarus
instead of a god. “Keep calm,” he yelled. Next,
more quietly, “Sorry.” She scanned the ground for
haystacks piled ten high. She looked up and caught
a glimpse of the plane, a mocking feather.
Peter Bland

It’s difficult not to be curious
about this bone-man under the skin:
to think how he’s carried me over the years
without malice or contempt. In return
I’ve fed and clothed him of course,
shared the same bed, been shaped by his will,
but even after a lifetime together
I can’t say I know him, not for real . . .
apart, that is, from a broken wrist
when he once came peeping through.
And now there’s this inner-map of his ills,
that ageing stoop, those honeycombed hips,
the thinning tail-end bits. But what
really appals is his Model-T look.
He’s indistinguishable — except to the nurse —
From the millions like him who’ve come and gone
since one of us first stood up. Perhaps
it’s time to applaud his ancestral support
and keep this negative by the bed. Even then
it’ll be tough to view that crumbling master-plan
without a more personal sense of loss.

It was a year when our bodies 
surrendered—knees, backs, lungs—listen

to your shoulder, instructed my physiotherapist, 
who was also studying English Literature

at university. Wild nights/ Wild nights she’d quote 
from Emily Dickinson as she massaged my neck

which is still sometimes sore after one parachute jump 
too many, twenty years ago. Risk was what I thought

was needed, and yes, risk was good, but I had 
a tendency to overdo it. What wrecked

my neck this time was the garden. It also 
took a toll on his lungs, which do not suffer pollen

gladly. The family cold, which hung around 
for five weeks, showed no sign of departing,

on top of which I lost my voice, which caused 
confusion at the doctors when I went after being

bitten by something in the garden. My arm 
started to swell and the inflammation crept down

towards my elbow as I struggled to explain that it 
wasn’t my lack of voice I had come about.

Pulling my sleeve up seemed to work and the doctor 
was very impressed, as was the medical student

who accompanied him. The doctor drew around the swelling— 
a shape that by this time resembled a very large and interesting

potato—and said that if it got much bigger, or if I began to feel 
unwell, I should come back up smartly. That night

the temperature plummeted. There was thunder 
and lightning and hailstones the size of marbles.

We stayed inside for the next two days, with everybody 
coughing and me unable to speak, resting my sore, red arm

while the new ceiling insulation watched over us. 
At this point I remember someone commenting on

an earlier poem of mine, which resembles this one, 
saying some people might think it’s not poetry. Well . . .

There were the colds and the neck and the lungs and 
the bite and then there was the hip, which is

connected to the knee, though not literally. 
In between is the femur which my friend Marion

has broken. I have a Dutch hache in the oven (for the purposes 
of this poem—if in fact it is a poem—I will call it

a casserole), which involves lemons and cloves and which 
I have made twice successfully, once unsuccessfully,

before. (Currently I am going through a phase where nothing 
I make tastes of anything. Or, everything I make

tastes of nothing. I hope the casserole doesn’t fall into 
this culinary hole.) Shortly after the neck came the knee,

which is where this poem really began. To explain . . . 
something happened which made me want to add

to a poem I had thought was finished. I tried, 
but I had been right in the first place—that poem had

somehow closed its doors, in the way poems do, 
so I had to begin something new.

My knee I injured running up stairs at the National Library. 
I knew this was not a good idea, but I was at work

on a poetry exhibition, excited, and full of a great sense 
of urgency (poetry can do this to you). All day I ran

up and down the stairs in search of books and manuscripts. 
When I woke the next morning my knee was sore

and I couldn’t bend it very easily. I felt 
an impending sense of doom. Since I was quite young

I have had bad knees—the right always worse 
than the left. At 14, I had six weeks of plaster, then

an operation, then another six weeks of plaster, after which 
my leg emerged, wasted and looking and feeling as if

it belonged to someone else. Around my knee 
was an impressive scar shaped like a question

mark. After a lot of physio and lifting weights 
made from my father’s socks filled with sand

and draped over my ankle, my knee improved. It’s years ago 
now, and although it still troubles me sometimes, mostly

it’s all right. I’m not meant to run or play sports—like tennis 
or squash—which involve sudden changes of direction.

Poetry, being low impact, is fine. After the stairs, 
I went to see the orthopaedic specialist who carved

the question mark on my knee. For the purposes of this poem 
we’ll call him Chris. (We might as well, because that’s his name.)

We talked about joints and their weaknesses and that led us 
to my father’s rare, wonky ankle, which Chris told me

had been written about in a British Medical Journal. He promised 
to find the article in the medical library and send it to me.

After my knee recovered and the poetry exhibition 
opened, I began writing in my shed, which is up on the lawn

at the back of our house. Am I working hard? Yes, I am. 
I’ve been writing and thinking and clearing a space

near the vegetable garden for another shed. This time 
for the children. It’s been good working to make room

for this shed, even though it’s meant some mornings spent 
with the shovel, instead of working on this poem. I’ve developed

a sore back, but nothing serious, just an ache. Like my sister 
who wrote from London to say, among other things,

that she’d hurt hers again getting off her bike.
We’re all getting older and sadder.

Clearing a space for the shed has meant packing 
the vegetable garden into cardboard boxes and

moving it down the steps to outside the kitchen 
door. Once the shed is built it can go back again

but I’m fearful of plants being trampled. 
Shaun—our builder—is careful, but he thinks a lot

about surfing and sometimes doesn’t watch 
where he’s putting his feet. Occasionally

he doesn’t turn up, because the southerly has dropped 
and the surf is good. I don’t mind this. I like the fact

that he also has his mind on other things. 
I knew he was all right when he walked past

the kitchen door one day and said I smell soup— 
have you got a bacon hock in that?

Fitter Turner is an occupation I’ve been thinking about 
lately. The words doing  just that in my head. It’s because of

my father’s ankle. I think he could’ve done with someone 
in that trade. Every day these words come to me, and then,

in the mail, comes the copy of the article about my father’s 
ankle, written when I was two. It’s entitled

Congenital ball and socket ankle joint and talks of 
a boy, aged five—my father—being admitted to hospital

with a disease of the cervical spine. This article recounts 
how, later, my father, aged 21, presented with:

a fracture of the tip 
of the lateral malleolus 
of the right ankle. 
A small effusion was present 
in the joint. A ball-and-socke t 
ankle joint was present,     
and both tibia and fibula helped    
to form the proximal articular 
surface. The scaphoid was fused 
to the talus and the cuboid 
articulated with the 4th 
metatarsal. The 5th metatarsal 
was absent. Only two cuneiforms 
were present. The second toe 
had only two phalanges. 
The right limb was almost 
1 inch shorter than the left . . . 
No abnormality was noted 
in the skull, chest, abdomen, 
pelvis, hands, knees 
and renal tract.

That came later.

The X-rays of my father′s spine, ankle and foot 
were the saddest things imaginable. I went outside

and moved some earth. For two days I did this, 
until my back ached and my knees hurt so much

I couldn’t do it any longer. I went back 
to my shed and looked at the pictures again.

For an odd moment I imagined those bones of my father’s 
in the ground. But we didn’t bury him. He burned

and became ash. When the red curtains in the crematorium 
shushed closed to conceal his coffin, our son called out

hey!—startled by the trick of it all.      Hey!      it was what 
we all wanted to say. The ash my father became

was shocking in its greyness and grittiness. 
We scooped handfuls and scattered what he now was

on the ground. What more can you say about this? 
Hey!

That it is not the worst thing that can happen?

In the middle of writing this poem I had a dream 
I was wrestling with the ghost of Katherine

Mansfield. A friend suggested it was a poem 
I was struggling with. Yes. This one. Which I know

seems very plain and straightforward and 
conversational, but it’s taken a lot to get it

this way. Today I will take the casserole to Marion 
who can now manage on one crutch, which is good,

because her husband (who coached the rowing crew 
I was coxswain for, after being told I shouldn’t row

on account of my knees) is about to have a knee 
replacement and she needs to be able to get around.

Tomorrow I fly to Nelson. I don’t like flying, 
but I will grit my teeth and get on the plane.

Last time I flew on a small plane, 
the pilot said before take-off Lifejackets

are under your seats. If anything happens, put them 
on. Don’t wait for me to tell you what to do

because I’ll be out of here. In Nelson I will be met 
by a woman who describes herself as having

‘the ponytail of indifference’. I look forward 
to this. She will drive me to the Rosy Glow

Chocolate Shop, above which I will stay. I will 
lie down on the comfortable bed, then I will

get up and go and read some poems. Later 
I will go to a Haydn Mass with the woman

with the ponytail, who will sleep a beautiful, 
attentive sleep through the third and fourth movements.

Next morning I will buy some chocolates from 
Rosy Glow and go to the airport in a taxi driven by

‘Dickie’ who has woken up deaf in one ear. 
Maybe the doctor? I will yell. Twelve thirty

he’ll reply, then pass me a mint. I’ll head home 
on a plane flown by a pilot who doesn’t know

his left from his right, and from the air I’ll see 
our house and my shed and the frame

of the new shed taking shape by the vegetable garden. 
The weather will be beautiful and I’ll remember

that today is the day a friend may learn that his life 
will be shorter than he would ever wish. Two friends

will tell me their mothers are dying. My son 
will collect a cricket bat in the face and his eye

will turn the colours of evening. To pass the time 
at the hospital he will ask me to list the things

that never end: space, time, the universe, 
dogs barking at the mailman, numbers, weather,

fear, love, kindness, television, Haydn’s mass . . . 
Then a doctor will come, and because we live

in a very small pocket in the great big frock 
of the world, he will be the chairman of my son’s

school board of trustees. He is a kind man and a good 
doctor, and he will patch up my son’s cheek and we’ll

head home. On the way I will think about the poetry 
reading and how, beforehand, I met a man who makes

furniture, but originally trained as a fitter and 
turner. Do I know what that is? And how,

in the middle of the reading, I glanced down at my book 
and a tiny green preying mantis

scrambled bright and awkward over the page. 
I will tell my son about this. He will suggest

I might have carried the insect in my bag, all the way 
from Wellington, all the way from the vegetable garden

in boxes, and I’ll say yes, I might have. And we’ll agree 
that wherever it came from, it seems like a good sign.

And we’ll drive home—his eye matching sky—which is 
an easy rhyme, but pleasing, to me, nevertheless.

She has emerged from the bamboo forest 
with a white, fleshy-petalled flower

and her gun. 
Save the country,

save the youth 
she is supposed to say

because she is young and solid looking. 
She looks out at her admirers

and critics, distracting them with her stare, 
the clever pattern in her headscarf,

that poorly foreshortened thumb 
and dark pink fist.

She is flat and smooth. 
Foreigners smile at her,

wanting to look good.

Duong Ngoc Canh painted me 
in 1945. Then someone else 
carved my image in wood 
and multiplied me.

I was all over the city, 
flapping against plane trees 
and rolling down the street 
with other rubbish.

Not quite immortal or free from aging 
I was still luckier than most 
for I had hundreds and hundreds 
of lives.

The way you shed eyelashes and skin, 
I let my replicas go painlessly. 
Somewhere in the city, a printing press 
was constantly replacing

what I’d lost.

He admires her elegance, 
that crisp feline stare, 
her constantly changing surveillance

over the tiny gallery’s entrance. 
It’s not his first visit here. 
But still, he admires the elegance

of his situation, the quiet insistence 
of her gun (the same black as her hair). 
Her constantly changing surveillance,

warm then cold; if only he could rinse 
himself in her stare. 
He admires her elegance.

To him, the print’s 
worth more than American dollars just for 
that constantly changing surveillance.

They leave the shop together, an odd pair— 
she tucked under his arm with a look of despair. 
He, admiring the elegance 
of her constantly changing surveillance.

People like to be looked at, 
especially by beautiful eyes. 
But only up to a point. 
Eventually they 
are no longer open 
to critique, which is why

you should stare secretly. Why 
believe me? I have experience at 
observing. My eyes are always open. 
At times I hate my wide painted eyes, 
though I’m becoming wiser. They, 
I now realise, give my life a point.

That gun slung over my shoulder, the point 
of the barrel behind my headscarf. Why, 
that’s no weapon. My hands are frozen. They 
could never pull a trigger. Now, look at 
the magnolia between my fingers, my eyes 
can’t see it. They only stare out, wide open—

immutably, frustratingly open. An artist carved them with the point 
of his tiny print knife, thinking, ‘Eyes 
as beautiful as a cat’s. Why 
not?’ Carefully prepared, I ended up at 
the gallery, alone with my sight. They,

the art dealer and her daughter, sold me. They 
made twenty US dollars from a man with an open- 
mouthed smile. He seemed to stare at 
everything. Cycling us through Hanoi, he pointed 
out the lake, as if he knew I could see. Why 
he understands me I can’t say. But his eyes

are so glad—pale-lashed, green eyes— 
that I forget to question his awareness. They 
flatter me, sympathise, know why 
it’s hard to be always open 
to malice, accepting it wide-eyed; that’s my point. 
I am obliged to look out at

my viewers, constantly, eyes open 
like a clear conscience. The man realises this point; 
he needs to look at me, and to be looked at.

English was the uncoolest: awkward people 
reading Shakespeare in a room. 
We got trapped, but managed to get out 
before the poetry started.

Food Tech was okay, with fresh bread 
dyed to look mouldy, and bright blue juice 
that it was easy to guess was lemon. 
You could buy cans of air, too.

There was a long queue at Chemistry 
because you got to make potions. 
One of the white-coats 
came rushing out in a real lather.

Psychology had us reading 
a short paragraph describing ‘Mr Smith’, 
then answering questions about his 
personality. Opinions divided neatly.

The trick turned out to be a single word. 
Some paragraphs described Mr Smith 
as ‘warm’, others as ‘cold’. 
The psychologists beamed cleverly.

‘Applied commonsense,’ snorted a man 
wearing a Microbiologists 
               are Little Buggers T-shirt. 
Outside, padded eggs were being dropped

from a rooftop. Engineering. 
People kept saying Vet was best. 
It had the cow with the glass panel. 
Actually, the panel wasn’t that interesting,

sort of dark and red. The cow 
was eating hay in a small concrete room. 
Mostly it just ate, but now and then 
it would look sadly round at everyone,

and that’s when I got to thinking 
about philosophy. 
The department wasn’t easy to find. 
It turned out to be a single office

down a badly lit corridor. 
A faded note on the door said 
‘Back in 10’. And so 
my education began.

I like dinner music.
I like water in a clay jug.
I like it when the water rains on me.

I was just a tourist in those mountains. I drove wildly down steep
slopes through gorges and cascades. After the brutal descent, I
arrived at a belvedere with a breath-taking view.

I will tell you something: In 1897, three fragments of broken jug
were discovered in Egypt. They were 3000 years old. Poems were
painted on the fragments. One of them is
                    the poet smells his lover’s shirt . . .
In 1951, French Egyptologists found twenty-eight more pieces of
the same jug and the rest of the poem was restored
                    that sniff of sweetness instantly
                                        transports him to the South Seas 

O Rio dos Poetas

I met a sage in a state of bliss
who subsisted on a glass of milk each day.
Below him stretched a great emptiness
carved out of existence, the head-waters
of the Mondego River.
A short distance away was
the birthplace of the ‘discoverer’ of Brazil.

My father died in December.
With my brothers I carried him
to the low house reserved
for dead soldiers.
When it was my turn to speak
I recalled driving though green paddocks
in his Chevrolet,
the road driving into my eyes.
It was the first day of the holidays.
We got lost in the traffic
and separated from the cortege
so we stopped for sandwiches and beer
and played billiards in a club.
A band was set up to play
but after a dispute with the management
they took their gear away.
I hope I never
I hope I never
see that part of Auckland again.

Language is my neighbourhood.
I live in Alphabet City.
The people who live here open their hearts to the sun.

Today was the birthday of Louis Braille, the inventor of a reading
system for the blind,
the day the sputnik fell back to Earth.

My horoscope says:
‘Writing frequently will help you sustain a relationship with
someone at a distance.’

At night I watch the moon and imagine exciting places 
over the horizon. Only a fool does not see that the vast 
industrial economies are temporary. I say too much. My 
throat is infected with words. At the country hospital, I am 
treated by a beautiful doctor. That evening we drink wine 
from the valley on the balcony of the hotel. Look, she says, 
the moon is moving into the distance, three centimetres 
each year, which is the speed at which fingernails grow! 
We sing revolutionary songs until all hours, drinking to 
friendship between our two countries. In her language, the 
word for ‘Sunday’ is ‘resurrection’. I leave the following 
morning.

This existence is not original.
          Like love itself,
the universe is mostly smoke and mirrors,
          I am I,
the beginning of illusion.
          You are you,
the centre of confusion.
          I write to you alone at night,
speaking into the silence.

Where are the mothers who held power 
and children, preserved peaches 
in season, understood about 
greens and two classes of protein 
who drove cars or did not have a licence 
who laughed, raged and were there? 
Take Mrs Russell who rode her irate bike, 
an upright fly that buzzed 
with a small engine on its back wheel 
up South Road past the school football field 
on her way to the hospital. Consider 
the other Mrs Russell, drama judge, teacher of 
speech and elocution in a small front room, 
part-time reporter on The Hawera Star. 
And Mrs Ellingham who had an MA in French, 
ah, the university. Or Mrs Smith, one knee stiff 
with TB, her tennis parties on Saturdays, adults 
on banks and we smoked their cigarettes in the bamboo. 
Her legs shone, their skin in diamonds like a lizard’s. 
Then Mrs Chapman who sang in the church choir, 
formed brooches from fresh white bread, 
made you look for a needle till you found it, 
heated records and shaped them into vases for presents 
who did a spring display in the window of Gamages Hats.

They have left the vowels uncorrected, the stories unproofed. 
They have rested their bicycles inside their garages, 
looked up the last word, la dernière mot, in Harraps Dictionary,
let needles lie in the narrow dust between verandah boards. 
They have tested the last jam on a saucer by a window 
comforted the last crying child they will ever see, 
and left. How we miss them and their great strength. 
Wait for us, we say, wait for me. 
And they will.

The first time I saw you 
I don’t know which I loved more 
you with your tranquil neck 
calmly transporting yourself through the world 
or the one who followed you everywhere 
trolling the dark waters like a hook.

The strange thing was that 
as each other’s opposite and negative 
we were even visible 
I with my tatty winter coat 
smelling of reeds 
you consisting entirely of surfaces 
or should I say one fabulously curved surface 
smooth and white as an egg.

I have no idea what you saw when you looked at me 
a shadow dully pursued by the shape that cast it 
a placeholder reserving a space from nonexistence. 
Perhaps you saw God’s fearsome ability 
to be absent, his morosely taken option 
to hoard his riches in another universe. 
In anyone else, such a thought would be absurd. 
In your case, it was luminous and adorable 
shining in the dark location known as me.

It was inevitable I would follow you 
the sound of laughing that came 
though you never laughed 
the sweet nonsensical conversations 
in which you remained impassively silent 
the pointless journeys you took 
your eyes perfectly round. 
My desire was the desire to be superlative 
I, who had spent years in domestic craft 
became selfishly single-minded as an artist 
inflicting your beauty on myself 
like some ecstatic adolescent 
cutting her arm with a pocket knife.

At night I would disappear. 
You and the moon would glow. 
I hated to think of the dark 
covering you over like a mouth.
Gordon Challis
Walking an imaginary dog

You have to do this where I live —
the caravan park does not allow real ones.
Every morning
I slip out before too many people are around
dragging the dog at first
finding any spare power points
available to charge him up;
those with caravans already there
he pisses on
discharging an electrolytic urine
which strips the paint.
Then we try
outside the park: the sandflats of the creek,
the oyster-bladed rocks, the mangroves’
many attempts to start out again for heaven.

He sniffs heaven
in onion smells before the steak goes on
and makes no judgement whether breakfast
is the right time.

I go behind him holding the leash
gently though not letting him
surge too far foraging ahead
not too far down my road.
To passers-by I would appear
a blind man trusting my hand
to scan for obstacles or
reaching out to touch the small face of a child.
Geoff Cochrane
Seven Unposted Postcards to My Brother

Turn fifty, Steve, 
and it all slides into view! 
And why when one gets old 
must one look so hideous? 
While lingering of course 
in some grotty council flat 
with basketball at midnight in the halls?

Better by far 
to live life backwards 
from the grave to the cradle.

Tamar Street and Kneebone’s butchery,
saveloys and shillings for the gas.

I had the top bunk. 
A cheapish crucifix 
with a skinny, tinny Christ 
had been fixed to the wall above my pillow; 
up there with me too 
were a Mitchell bomber, The Satan Bug
and a book on conjuring.

I’d never be so weIl equipped again.

Landing now and then a mucoid sprat, 
we’d fish a brown lagoon 
in which had somehow sunk 
a girthsome boiler fouled by mustard rusts.

Or I’d take you to the pictures.

Sculpted curtains stained 
by lights of lime or rose.

Ben-Hur and Billy Budd and Bullitt.

Isn’t that what we were taught?
Isn’t that what we inferred 
we should believe?

You sported as a kid 
a woggy mop of hair.

ln time, you’d find a purchase on the world 
in the teachings of Bahaullah. 
Become a subtle painter, 
a provident and gentle patriarch.

As altar boys, we had our separate gigs: 
you did the church, and I did the convent.

Tight-lipped as spies, 
we’d pass one another at the gate, 
our missions shadily divergent.
Glenn Colquhoun
To a woman who fainted recently at a poetry reading

A blood pressure of ninety millimetres of mercury is normally required to adequately perfuse the central nervous system. If the head is lowered, however, the pressure needed to maintain consciousness is considerably lower. Of course if one has severed a major artery or torn it lengthwise like a weak seam in the lining of a jacket then poetry should not be blamed and, in fact, may become entirely appropriate.

It is wise to consider hypoglycaemia as a contributing factor. I have heard that a barley sugar placed per rectum in obtunded patients with a precipitously low serum glucose may at times mean the difference between them dying and never eating barley sugar again.

Simple dehydration, overheating or a sudden shock can also be associated with fainting. For this last reason poetry should not be left lying around especially if it is graphic in nature, with swear words in it like ‘bugger’ or ‘bastard’ or ‘shit’. Lines such as ‘She used to love me but now I am a crumb in the biscuit tin of life’ can induce vomiting. ‘She used to love me / My heart is the sound of oysters opening at low tide’ can also be counted on to take the breath away.

Micturation syncope is a syndrome in which men who increase their intra-abdominal pressure at the moment of urination can impair their venous return, cardiac output and subsequently faint, however this cause will usually be obvious from the history and immediate setting. Individuals suffering in this manner can sometimes be confused with those who have drunk too much then pissed themselves before collapsing.

Despite a strong link between alcohol and poetry this scenario seems unlikely to be the case in your situation and so it only remains for me to write you the following prescription – four black wheels swallowed whole like pills; one siren, the blade of a sharp knife; three sheets, as crisp as biting apples, two flashing lights striking matches in the wind – and in this small ambulance send you, like flowers, straight to hospital.

If I get lost someone will pick me up and post me. 
I am already licked and stamped on my green lapel.

The brooch from Te Papa will see me safely home. 
It's 3D – as in LSD – pounds, shillings and pence.

Let us go out and do the passegiata on the waterfront. 
If and when I get lost, you can slide me into the red box.

Of course I will be posted back into the past – 
back to when kowhai was pronounced kowhai.

How I stalled, 
hiding inside my head, 
liking it there, cushioned. 
Being in the world 
as it was unfolding,

with the sun shining neat 
on to footpaths, the rain's 
dribble on to hedges 
and patient mail-boxes, 
the smell of cooped-up budgies,

the deep, warm bath 
nine o'clock at night, 
the creak of the passage; 
all things that cluster 
to form a town were bearable

if the edges were woolly 
with fabrications. Rhododendrons 
and marigolds to soften front yards. 
The high school's highly-polished corridors, 
shadowed bike-sheds,

lagged pipes in the pre-fabs. 
The sound of clocks, of wooden walls 
relaxing behind wallpaper. 
The smell of coal. 
All framework for dreams.

Oh and let's not forget 
the heartbreak, the heartbreak 
of newly-mown grass, 
of any and every awful beauty. 
Yes, and that ache

of double-hung windows, 
of looking out at a world where hills 
meet sky; the outside world, 
its whole big, blue bluster, 
its yodel and strut. Mary Cresswell
Golden Weather (Cook Strait)


Nana died on Boxing Day 
we left Makara in kayaks

we paddled all night, we paddled away 
Dad steered to the Southern Cross

we lashed the dog to a boogie board 
and ate cold cheerios with tomato sauce

Porpoises played as we packed our sad 
at dawn we skimmed the swells

the yellow Lab sank beneath the waves 
Farewell, wept Mum, farewell.

At high noon Nana was bronzed 
we swallowed grief and sausage rolls

Not before time we left for home 
we turned our backs on the day

goodbye, we cried, you golden sun! 
goodbye, goodbye, you yellow dog!

At primary school on the monkey bars 
we'd hang, aching, from the middle rung

having riffed our way along the first six bars 
then the wrench in the shoulders at the seventh.

Nowhere to go but the classroom or home 
from the patch of rubbed out grass
where the rhythm failed us.

She leaves her shoes at the door
dresses in blue
and bares her vein
for the radioactive tracer 
which, inherently unstable, 
will almost certainly 
collapse in on itself 
and begin to break down.

Above, the unforgettable name 
of the machine.

To her left, a panel 
of cobalt, crimson and gold: 
a sideshow should 
the power supply fail.

To her right, coded instructions 
should the computer 
and irresistible chemistry 
develop a stammer 
or taste for adventure.

Feet first, she slides 
into the revolving hum
of the camera —

sun one minute, 
stars the next —

and, courtesy of the control room,
National Radio with
the trial testing of toxic gases,

fewer groceries 
in the family basket

and the News Headlines at Twelve 
counting down 
to Microsoft’s warning 
of a critical flaw 
in its software.

So take for starters the surge-black fissure, 
the waves which register the lunatic sense 
it is all well beyond us. Our flooded nature

rages at the dying light, measures 
its measures down some lone goat-track, 
works up some incorrigible reprise

on grace, etc., a tuning fork 
striking itself out of true on the table 
of the elements. But blow, burn, break

and be done with it: baptism will 
look like this, the flailing, the flensing of waves 
and the breath knocked into you, the haul

that finds you first-footing land, brings 
the morning. Forgive my making light of 
the glass half-empty and you weighing up the dregs;

but I will get up like a love-cast father 
awakening to children’s voices, the night- 
time true underfoot, who hears their laughter

and finds, at the unclosed door, the seam of light.

Well, we went to Takaka
for the weekend
and there was this spring.
Yes.
This spring.
And we could see under the
water with this mirror thing.
And there was this eel.
Yes.
This eel, swimming from right 
to left like a reel of silk ribbon,
like a pennant waving.
You know: a pennant,
with teeth and an eye like a
silver stud among all this 
pondweed. And there were
all these bubbles. Each one 
was like a little world 
rising in its sleek skin.
And then we went to see
the goldfields.
Yes.
Goldfields.
And there were these caves
in scrubland. They’d stripped
the hills till the ground ran red.
And we went into one of the
caves and there was this young 
man sleeping on fern fronds, 
meditating to make the world 
well. He had his dog with him. 
Yes.
His dog.
That’s how we knew he was there.
The cave was deep, like an ear.
Or a belly button. It was deep and
damp, and we heard the dog bark
down in the dark and a young man 
saying, “Be quiet!” 
The clay in the cave stuck 
to our hands like dry blood. 
We gave the young man a 
bread roll.
Yes.
A bread roll.
With cheese and egg. And we 
said, Well, good luck with the 
meditating and everything. 
He said, yeah, well, he was 
going to give it his best shot.
Then we drove home.
Yes.
Home.

That was our trip to Takaka.

There comes a moment
when you don’t know where you end 
and the creature in your arms begins.

The long rains. 
Two years on from the accident 
and the day after my sister left —
the day we knew we could be lovers no more 
than sun and moon embrace the cradled earth.

I almost missed it in the market, 
the monsoon slapping down, 
but turned to see what I’d ignored: 
wrapped in a faded, torn kikoy, a wriggle 
and her hopeless eyes staring into me:

and all of Africa’s anger and sex and wildness 
were riding in there.


2. The price

And there she was —
a baboon, 
I said —
and not one of the blue baboons 
you find upcountry 
but a golden baboon from the coast, 
a six-week-old Monroe blonde

who was already in my arms, 
her little hands fast around the buttons of my shirt.

Unotoka wapi?
(Where d’you get her?) 
I asked the Giriama —
one of the untouchable bushmen 
of the coast —
                              he’d shot her mother, 
drugged her with arrows to feed alive 
to his pet python

and I bought her there and then, 
for a ten bob cheque 
written in pencil
                                   which bounced.


3. Her name


Why did I give her such a tragic name? 
Perhaps it was the Hamlet I’d just done 
but more to the point — at only fifteen 
I guess I’d guessed what was to come;

and she as motherless as me 
that when I stared into her eyes —
and it’s this that I want to remember —
that look when you look into an animal

and see your own soul’s country 
deep in there, beyond the dark horizon. 
And she brought me flowers, petals from the garden, 
and her moon-coloured cries at night.


4. Food

Whatever I ate, she ate — and from my bowl: 
stone-sized chunks of aloneness 
and whatever else my father’s allowance allowed. 
Sometimes an arm of grass, poured on a silver plate 
from which her shining black fingers deftly sorted 
all the seeds, which she ate 
like a queen, buzzing away to herself, 
while I lay on the sofa 
smoking.


5. Tricks

Tricks? Yes, she could do tricks: 
she could outdrink anyone in the New Stanley, 
pints of Elephant beer, though once 
so drunk she jumped on Jack Block’s head —
the owner deep in concentrated talk 
trying to sell the place again. 
Why him? 
He banned us for ever then.

And her noise a wonder in my bed at night.

But it wasn’t her tricks so much 
as just her being there: 
at the chai kiosks and foodcarts of River Rd. 
we ate African for free 
sikuma wiki, posho, mukate maiyai —
for the punters we brought in.

And once, her first time on heat, 
I woke in the dark to find her 
gently
              sweetly 
wanking us off —
both of us together.


6. Inner child

Stare into her eyes —
the fires and shining greens, the night’s bright gems.

Do we reflect each other? Yes, we reflect each other —
but I want to enter that look and live in there for ever 
to know what the child inside her thinks of me 
and this other country, this dream I’ve brought her to.

And we stared into each other’s eyes —
       careless because we didn’t care 
       fearless because there was nothing to fear 
       but the death we both inhabited

laughing as we waited for the final act —
       like I was her Player King 
       and she my Player Queen.


7. Abuse

But it wasn’t all roses. 
Have you ever tried 
to house-train a baboon?

Shit everywhere. In our bed 
at night, in the kitchen: 
the houseboy fled after two days.

The old soliloquies of abuse: 
I cursed her, I wished her gone —
away into the prayers and habits of

white silence.
                             And was it physical abuse?

Yes, it was physical abuse: 
I rubbed her face in it. 
I beat her. 
I locked her in the toilet

where Africa’s tongue accused me, 
screaming her wonderful noise.


8. A story

My little put-put, my 50cc Yamaha —
that’s how she travelled, riding pillion, 
clinging to my waist, slipped inside my shirt.

Langata Rd., 4 a.m. — army roadblock: 
spikes and chains, and cavalettis on the road 
like a riding school.

The soldiers relax around me, smiling: 
Habari aku, bwana? Pleasantries of the black night —
no matter this mzungu on a bike.

Then, her tail twitches and stands up 
on the seat behind me — like a rod: Shaitani! 
Shaitani! Devil! and their guns all cocked at me.

‘Hey, whoa . . .’ holding to the softness in my voice. 
‘It’s only my baboon’ — and as always in Africa 
the childlike roar of laughter at ourselves

and friends for life, for ever.


9. What was to come

The Ministry of Wildlife was on to me. 
My friends were on to me. My sister 
was on to me, and the houseboys.

Through it all, Ophelia muttered at nothing. 
She picked the lice from my hair. 
She brought me avocados from high up the tree —

their dark jade glowing in her shiny black palms, 
in the creases of her fingers.


10. For ever

What is time to a baboon?

What did it mean to those eyes 
that followed me from room to room, 
or through the shantytowns 
and Arab Quarter alleys 
where children play soccer in the dust 
and call for her, and follow her, 
who followed me.

And even when she wasn’t there, 
when I locked her in the bathroom, 
I could feel her gargoyle eyes on me, 
the scrutiny that wildness grants —
to have this second sight with me.

But I don’t know what time meant to her, 
though if I had to guess 
I’d say it meant simply this: 
that we were there, together in that moment

and that the passing of each moment 
was for ever, or is for ever 
in the present simple tense to her.


11. Husband

I had to do something.
A ‘husband’ must be found for her.
A born-free solution. After all, 
this was Adamson Land.

I took her to a farm in Macharkos —
Eden Hill. For three weeks I climbed 
through trees with her, 
teaching her to swing through them —
to teach her to survive.

And then I betrayed her twice on paper: 
I divorced her with my signature. 
I gave up such rights as I was said to have 
and read again my traitor’s name —
printed in carbon on a BOAC ticket,

bound for England.


12. Bees

Under the flyover, a council flat in Hammersmith, 
where the letter came, falling like an autumn leaf, 
wrapped in someone’s white bandages.

It said that she’d been killed by bees, 
stung to death, 
trying to rob their honey.

I wept. I didn’t want to believe. 
I couldn’t weep her out of me.
I wept her out of me.


13. Baboonery

Time knows many ways of passing.

A yew tree in the graveyard at Stoke Gabriel —
green smoke of its branches 
hangs above the tombs. 
Its roots are said to feed in every grave.

Carvings on the church door. 
The gargoyle style
                                       they call baboonery —
how is it I forget you, 
Ophelia, 
for all of thirty years?

I look up at the stone faces: 
a worn-out Herne the Hunter, 
the wild hunt searching for souls —

and hold you as I come into myself, 
feeding on that moment

where I don’t know where I end

and the baboon in my arms begins.

Andy goes craving all over the beach 
with her red grip and her red grapple.

A red apple after dark isn’t red, 
it’s a black apple.

She says she’ll black up if she doesn’t have salt. 
She finds a sea urchin full of holes.

What’s a blue sea after dark? 
Are these the spaces where breath goes?

I find a gorgeous gold-yellow branch, 
a colour, a describable friend.

We carry our findings, our branches 
and urchins, from end to end.

The blue and red and yellow everywhere 
is our theory of colour, of light.

Young salt-footed fools, you know there are no ends, 
only ends in sight.

The shovels stood in a sticky underbelly of earth
as we stepped from the sidelines for him,
peeling our jackets, the boys loosening their ties.
Soon there was clay on our church-going gear
and his voice coming out of our childhood
coaching us to put our backs into it.
Flowers and fine words had never touched the man
like work, grunts behind a shovel’s bite,
the clean sound of clods as we heaved them in. Digging,
we bowed in memory of his stooped solid shape.
The dark damp weight of earth,
a provision, a very last word.

enter the Mongolian Women's Band 
with 
the years,

 

whose music, theirs and theirs, like language learned, 
inevitable, red and super-sound, 
outplays the days the days that made it mine

 

and beauty beauty adds to it – its stir, 
its wink, its melt, and anything that shines – 
this is The Horse that Overtook the Wind:

 

the little men that ride the plain 
on hearts that will not race again 
whose hoofbeats knock on heaven's door – 
they will not come back anymore

the history of hope is short : 
it has one chapter – Youth. I thought 
that memories would make me wise 
but nothing comes as no surprise

across the windy open spaces 
briefly bright their shining faces 
do with beauty then are gone – 
the horses gallop on and on

 

and if I played my darndest, darndest card, 
who have no beauty now, no more, what tricks 
I take have not the hearts they had before.

 

The Horse that Overtook the Wind is done, 
and beauty beauty raced it well – its stir, 
its wink, its melt and anything that shines.

 

exit the Mongolian Women's Band 
with 
the years.

Ernest Hemingway found rain to be
made of knowledge, experience
wine oil salt vinegar quince
bed early mornings nights days the sea
men women dogs hill and rich valley
the appearance and disappearance of sense
or trains on curved and straight tracks, hence
love honour and dishonour, a scent of infinity.
In my city the rain you get
is made of massive kauri trees, the call of forest birds
howling dark oceans and mangroved creeks.
I taste constancy, memory and yet
there’s the watery departure of words
from the thunder-black sand at Te Henga Beach.

Ernest Hemingway found rain to be
made of knowledge, experience
wine oil salt vinegar quince
bed early mornings nights days the sea
men women dogs hill and rich valley
the appearance and disappearance of sense
or trains on curved and straight tracks, hence
love honour and dishonour, a scent of infinity.
In my city the rain you get
is made of massive kauri trees, the call of forest birds
howling dark oceans and mangroved creeks.
I taste constancy, memory and yet
there’s the watery departure of words
from the thunder-black sand at Te Henga Beach.
