Andrew Johnston

THE SUNFLOWER 

for Stuart Johnston, 1931–2004

One young bloom in a vase or jar, breath- 
takingly yellow. And her 
hands, in the morning light, the way 
they arrange and rearrange. Death 
brings lilies, but someone has sent a sunflower: 
this is our penance, staring at the sun, 
its blind eye, its ragged halo. The day, 
in the end, took to its bed 
before the day was over, taking thee 
with it. Soon this flower, too, will be dead, 
its summer of wondering done 
about the sun, petal by petal: loved me;

didn’t know how; did, unsayably so. It leaves me 
as he left us, in the dark. From one breath 
to the next, he’d deflect a question: in his the- 
ology, I, me, mine were just not done. 
Because he saw eye to eye with death 
we can stare at the sunflower all day 
but his heavenly father’s garden was further 
than we were prepared to go—its bed 
of blood-red roses, its promises, its premises, the way 
everything had been arranged; ‘dead’ 
a manner of speaking, under the sun. 
We counted ourselves lucky, hour by hour,

and by the minutes of the sunflower 
(he doesn’t, he does, he doesn’t know me), 
each in his or her own way worshipping the sun 
and coming to other arrangements with death— 
that it is the end, in the abstract. And then one day 
someone calls, and you take a deep, deep breath. 
Sister nor’wester, southerly brother— 
into the mind of the man we guess our way, 
blind and deaf, senseless, because he is dead. 
From the end of the earth I will cry unto thee, 
as daughters and sons have always done, 
for words unsaid. The riverbed

was dry and I was thirsty. By your bed, 
near the end, we could count our 
blessings: each day, 
for one thing, and though it was winter, the sun. 
A sisterly sixth sense, when death 
began to bloom, flew me 
from the end of the earth. In a week you were dead 
but we shadowed one another 
through the brittle days before you went away. 
You talked and talked, as you’d always done, 
of all but you, till you were out of breath. 
I would have liked to hear—despite your fear of the-

atre (so foolish was I, and ignorant, before thee)— 
about your mother, for instance, who took to bed 
when tempers rose; and how the sun 
had burned a dead- 
ly thirst into your father’s breath; 
but the hard facts I craved, my mother 
knew, were the same stones, day 
after day, that you buried in death- 
ly silence, so that in this inscrutable way 
you could build—for you, for her, for six including me— 
a house, a plain, safe house, with a sunflower 
in the garden. ‘That which is done

is that which shall be done’ 
is all very well in the- 
ory, but what if the sun 
were black, and the book dead 
wrong, and the interval under death 
demanded a father 
as unlike his father as day 
and night? A breath 
of wind reaches me 
from the rose-bed; 
in its vase or jar the sunflower 
nods politely. Halfway

across the Channel, halfway 
between waking and sleeping, my mind undone, 
I had, as luck would have it, something of an inkling. The day 
had been long; as I lay in the boat’s narrow bed 
a wave of black joy lifted me and left in me 
knowledge so dark it shone. I held my breath. 
Fear fell away, of death, and other 
fears; the end, in the end, was the darkest jewel. I was dead 
tired, and fatigue’s mysterious flower 
spoke perhaps in tongues. But that black sun 
still shines—a talisman, obsidian, a bright antithe- 
sis. Its darkness made light of death

at most, however, for me; the death 
of someone else is something else. Your way 
led over the border; I am a stranger with thee, 
and a sojourner, but wherever I am, my place in the sun 
you prepared. His earthly power 
spent, your god, to us, is dead, 
but it was your belief that gave us breath, 
the life we take for granted every day. 
What sense of your sense will I take with me? 
How much of your world will we hand on? 
Just before the end, on the wall beside your bed, 
Peter pinned Leonardo’s St. Anne. Her

smile, wry, reminds me of you, and her 
hand-on-hip benevolence. Wherever death 
leads, we can meet here. The power 
of light in van Eyck and Vermeer. The breath 
of Wallace Stevens, overhearing his way 
to work. Every Henry James you read in bed, 
destiny and destiny like night and day. 
The valedictory music of ‘The Dead’. 
Thou hast set our iniquities before thee 
but when all—or almost all—is said and done 
sometimes it seemed you believed no less than me 
that when we die we go into the sun.

There is nothing new under the sun 
but much of it is mystery: this my mother knows. Her 
psychological eye revised your the- 
ological line. They’d converge, anyway, 
at the library—your rain-cloud, your seed-bed. 
You read and read and read. And saved your breath 
not to write yourself, but to make each day 
bloom and turn. The astonishing flower, 
head full of edible seeds, bows down dead: 
this is the credible sense of its death, 
that here, where its turning is done 
other journeys begin. It seems to me 

you believed what you believed, but it strikes me, 
too, that the seeds you sowed, in the mind’s sun, 
mattered most. (Sometimes they grew a bed 
of nails: you were often ‘sick to death’ 
of fads and feuds, the way 
they shut out the sun.) Flower 
of wonder, flower of might: if I see thee 
on the other side, when I am dead, 
I’ll know there is an other 
side. Till then, while we have breath, 
our burgeoning work is not done: 
what we have been given is a rich, difficult day

that could go on without us, nevertheless, all day, 
whistling a cryptic tune. It comes to me 
in the conservatory, where we catch a little sun: 
I didn’t know you well, and then you went away 
but in the day of my trouble I will call upon thee 
because you were a man to get things done. 
In its vase or jar, the young sunflower 
I imagine has served its purpose. Beneath its bed, 
all along, the river was flowing—deep, where death 
knows more than we. Sylvia dons her 
gardening gloves to gather the dead 
roses. Man cannot utter it, but under his breath:

‘Remember me, my loves, when I am dead.’ 
Rest on memory’s sea-bed: we will swim down to thee. 
And in our own blue day, we will gaze at death 
the way this one young bloom would gaze at the sun. 
In the garden of the living, my mother stops for breath. 
Thou thy worldly task hast done. And seeds rain from the sunflower.
